You're raising your kids here,
what,
what's your policy on letting them out?
Man,
it's slippery.
Hello?
How old is your oldest?
Well,
having grown one who's 22 and then I have a a 10 and an eight.
Okay.
And it's hard man,
because I don't even like when they go over on sleepovers over a friend's house.
Scary.
Whose problem is that?
It's everybody's problem.
You know,
it's uh,
well I mean the parents,
I mean we're,
we're pretty selective about the parents,
but there's a lot of parents that don't pay attention to their kids at all.
Meaning they just tune out and they get on the phone.
The kids are sticking forks into the fucking outlets.
And you know,
there's,
there's a lot of weirdness when it comes to the styles of that people have been
raising their children.
What does this,
uh,
this graph he just pulled up?
So,
you know,
um,
depressive episodes.
So I guess I'll just narrate it for people are listening,
not watching video,
you know?
So you said before,
it's like a virus came out of nowhere and that is sort of what it's been like.
Um,
so what's happening in America and I know what's happening at the same in
Britain and Canada.
I haven't looked at other,
other places yet,
haven't dug into those stats.
Um,
what's happening is that rates of depression and anxiety were fairly stable,
uh,
from the nineties through the early two thousands.
And what you see here,
and this is a graph that's in our book,
is that the,
uh,
the percentage of kids aged 12 to 17 in America who met the criteria for having
a major depressive episode.
That is,
they're given a symptom checklists,
but nine symptoms.
And if you say yes to five of them,
uh,
you know,
feeling hopeless and couldn't get out of bed.
Um,
if you say yes to five or more,
you're,
you're considered to have had a major depressive episode.
And what you see is that the rate for boys is around 5%.
And then around 2011 it starts going up and now it's around 7%,
which is actually a somewhat substantial increase.
Uh,
but as you can see in the graph,
the line for girls starts off higher cause girls have more mood disorders,
more anxiety,
depression.
Boys have more antisocial behavior,
alcoholism,
crime and violence.
But girls turn it,
it's called an internalizing disordered girls basically make themselves
miserable.
Boys make other people miserable.
Uh,
the gross rate is higher,
but it was stable from,
you know,
2000,
uh,
at least in that graph from 2005 through 2010 and then right around 2011,
2012 starts going up and it goes way up to the point where it goes up from about
12% to now,
about 20% of American teenage girls have had a major depressive episode in the
last year,
one in five.
So this is huge.
Okay,
next slide.
Now let's look just at college students.
So this is more selective.
These are kids who've made it into college.
And what we see is that in 2010 and 28 and 2012 when college students,
we're all millennials,
the rates were pretty low.
This is,
do you have a psychological disorder?
And they didn't specify they or they said such as depression.
Uh,
and so we see about a two to 3% of the boys,
uh,
the college men,
and about 5% of a five to 6% of college women say yes to that question.
That's when it was millennials.
But beginning of 2013,
Gen z begins arriving.
That's kids born in 1995,
uh,
z begins arriving.
And so by 2016,
colleges are almost all gen z and the rates shoot up way up.
Yeah.
We're looking at these charts right now and folks who are just listening.
The,
it's like,
it's a like a jump ramp for a BMX racer.
I mean,
it really is crazy for whim out of nowhere.
And it hits at 2012 it goes on a very sharp upward angle,
right.
Cause from six less than 6% to almost 15% in the space of four years.
That's crazy.
It's crazy.
A book.
You can't say that.
That's a mechanism.
Crazy.
It's a crazy,
what can I say?
A fucking nuts.
And I say that now because some people might have been that allergy.
Oh boy.
Um,
ludicrous.
It's preposterous.
It's really frightening.
Really frightening.
Yeah.
And so this has huge ramification.
Now let me just make clear,
I think we have another,
another slide there would bring up the next one.
Okay.
So,
um,
some people say,
oh,
come on you guys,
or catastrophizing,
the increase isn't real.
It's just that,
you know,
this generation,
they're really comfortable talking about mental illness.
Um,
and so the fact that they say they're depressed just means they're comfortable.
It doesn't mean that there's an epidemic of,
I've heard this argument that it's just an argument of recognition rather than
have perfectly reason.
That's right.
Diagnostic criteria changed perfectly reasonable argument.
Is it true?
Well,
let's look at behavior.
So with this graph shows is the number of boys out of 100,000 who are admitted
to a hospital every year because they cut,
they deliberately harmed themselves.
They had to be hospitalized.
And what you see here is that,
um,
the,
there's no change over time.
So boys,
these graphs from 2001 to 2015,
the lines are flat for all the different age groups.
Um,
and just notice that the highest rates are around 280 out of 100,000 per year.
That's the situation for boys.
Next Raf Bang.
The situation for girls is really,
really different.
So the averages are higher.
So self harm has always been more of a girl thing than a boy thing.
Um,
via,
you know,
boys are,
except for suicide.
Exactly.
We'll get to that.
That's right.
That's next.
So if we look at self harm,
what you see here is that the rates were fairly stable up until 2009 and then
bang,
just as in the lastly,
same thing,
the rates for girls go shooting up.
So the rate for 15 to 19 year old girls is up 62% since 2009.
Um,
now notice the rate for the millennials.
That is the rate for the oldest girls age 20 to 24.
That's only up 17%.
So whatever happened,
it's not effecting the millennials,
it's effecting Gen z.
I think ways there when it hit the advanced key cause I think there's one number
missing there.
Ah,
okay.
I'll just uh,
no go forward.
Okay.
The number of the narrative there.
It is the rate for the youngest girls.
Check that out.
Now the youngest growth,
these are 10 to 14 year old girls.
These are preteens,
okay.
They didn't use to cut themselves.
They used to have very low rates,
but bang,
beginning in 2010 it shoots up.
It's up 189%.
It has nearly tripled in the last five or six years.
What's the gone?
We don't know for sure,
but the reason why,
so because of the huge sex difference,
the leading candidate and the timing.
Look at that.
Timing is social media.
So if you look at what happened in this country and all around the world,
um,
Facebook opens up to the world in 2006 you know,
you don't have to be a college student,
but very few teenagers have a Facebook account.
2006 2007 the iPhone comes out,
but it's very expensive and very few teenagers have won.
By 2010 2011 around half of American teenagers have an iPhone or Samsung.
They have a smartphone and they have access to social media in middle school.
Because even though for Facebook and Instagram,
I think the minimum age is and was 13 you know,
I mean my,
my son is 12 or a lot of his friends have Instagram.
You just lie.
So middle school kids are now getting on social media by 2010 2011 you've got a
lot of them.
And that's what I think is the main cause of this because social media does not
really affect boys very much.
But man,
does it affect girls?
Why is that?
So if you look at,
so a couple of reasons.
First,
look at the nature of aggression within the sexes.
Boys bullying is physical.
Okay?
Boys are physically dominating and then the risk is that they're going to get
punched.
Okay,
so you give everybody an iPhone.
What do they do with it?
Games and porn.
They don't use it to hurt each other.
Um,
boys,
your boys.
That's right.
It doesn't affect their bullying.
But girls aggression that girls are actually as aggressive as boys.
There's research from the eighties and nineties on this.
If you include relational aggression,
girls don't bully each other by threatening to punch each other.
In the face.
Girls bully each other by damaging the other girls' social relationships,
spreading rumors,
spreading lies,
spreading a doctorate,
photograph,
saying bad things,
excluding them.
It's relational aggression.
And so it's always been really hard to be a middle school student.
It's always been harder to be middle school girl than a middle school boy.
Okay?
So beginning around 2010,
2011,
we throw in this brand new thing into the mix.
Okay girls,
here's this beautiful thing in your hand and here's all these programs where you
can damage anyone.
Social relationships anytime of the day or night with deniability from an
anonymous account.
Go at it,
girls.
And so,
um,
the nature of girls bullying is hypercharged by social media and smartphones.
That's one mechanism.
The other two mechanisms,
um,
are the social comparison because it's always been hard to be a teen girl
emerging with beauty standards and impossible beauty standards.
And when we were kids,
you had impossible beauty standards that these models were all doctored up and
then Photoshop.
Okay?
So you've got these impossible beauty standards out there.
But beginning with social media,
and especially in recent years,
your own friends can put on a filter and Instagram to make their lips big or
their skin cleaner,
their eyes bigger.
So your own friends are more beautiful than they are in real life.
You feel uglier.
So that's the social comparison of beauty.
And then probably the biggest single one is the fear of missing out,
the fear of being left out.
So all kids are subject to this.
Everyone's concerned about whether they're included or whether they're,
they're excluded,
but girls are much more sensitive.
And so suddenly when everybody is tracking each others who was invited,
who's there,
and especially any program in which a girl puts something out and then waits to
see what other people say about it,
that is what's really damaging.
I think we,
again,
let me stress,
we don't know for sure there are some experiments on this,
but it's mostly correlational stuff we're talking about here at correlational
data.
Um,
but the overall experience of being a girl who was born in 1995 or later and got
this stuff in middle school is different from being a girl born in 1990,
let's say we didn't get this stuff until college.
Are you concerned that this is a trend that as technology becomes more and more
invasive and with these new technologies as they emerge that this is going to be
worse?
Yes,
yes.
But it doesn't have to be so,
so I think in the last two years were really waking up to this,
um,
the founders of this technology.
It's really interesting.
So first of all,
it's important to note as many people have read the,
it's a lot of the creators of this technology do not let their kids have it.
So they know that these things were made to be addictive.
They're made to grab eyeballs and not let go.
So,
um,
that's one thing we all wish to keep that in mind,
that the makers of this are wary of it.
Second,
they've gotten more and more addictive as they've gotten better and better as
they've evolved.
Um,
so they're getting more and more.
And Fortnite is an example of,
of uh,
you know,
uh,
extremely addictive game.
Um,
um,
and it does.
But,
uh,
so when you,
if you've ever been to a,
um,
uh,
a casino and you've seen kids,
you've seen people sitting at those machines,
like zombies just you know,
hour after hour pulling that crank.
Cause there were psychologists working out the variable reinforcement schedule
for the gambling companies,
psychologist,
they're helping companies manipulate users and that's happening to our kids too.
They're,
they're are manipulated to stay on the device.
So once we're beginning to realize this,
the nature of these technologies,
the fact that what is good for adults may be terrible for 12 year olds,
10 year olds.
And once we realize that these things are so attractive that they crowd out all
the other healthy activities like playing outside,
playing with groups of friends.
Um,
once we realize that,
I think,
and I hope we'll get some reasonable norms.
And what I'd like to propose,
this is fantastic to be able to talk to so many people.
Um,
what I'd like to propose is if you have kids,
especially if you have kids under about 16,
please do what you can to talk with other parents.
And especially with the principal at any schools,
you know,
and say we need some sensible norms because we can't solve this problem by
ourselves.
So I want to keep my kids off social media.
But my son says,
well,
most of my friends,
or have Instagram accounts now,
if it was every friend and he was the only one who was excluded,
it will be really hard for me to stick to my guns.
I would do,
it would be really hard.
Whereas if it was only a few of his friends and most of them weren't,
it would be so easy.
And I hear that from parents over and over.
I don't want my kid on social media,
but I don't want her to be left out.
And so if the principal would just say,
parents,
please,
this is getting,
this is getting out of hand.
This is harming kids.
Look at the data,
look at the suicide rates,
look at the,
look at the self harm rates.
We've got to do something.
What do you do?
A couple things.
I think it's pretty a couple of pretty simple norms.
One,
all devices out of the bedroom by a set time,
at least half an hour before bed,
there is no reason why kids should have an iPhone or a computer or a screen in
their bedroom because so many kids are attracted to it.
They'll check their status overnight and it interrupts their sleep.
We can't be having teenagers who have interrupted sleep that there's just no
benefit from that.
Gave my daughter a fitbit,
my 10 year old to a monitor,
all sorts of different things.
She was interested in it.
So we got her one for Christmas and um,
she slept five and a half hours the first night she had it on cause we could
check.
We're like,
what are you doing?
She's checking the fifth is what,
what is,
what's going on?
And I'm like,
this is not good.
Like you can't wear this now.
And she's like trying to make all these arguments to keep,
but I'm like,
listen,
she goes,
it's not distracting me.
I go,
if it's not distracting you,
then you shouldn't care if you don't have it on right.
Because then it's not going to mean anything.
And then there's like this like a shit.
Like she got checkmated that's right now because these things are so attractive,
so addictive.
I had one of those goddamn watches,
those apple watches.
I had it on for one day and while I was doing the podcast,
it kept vibrating.
I'm like,
Oh my God,
I'm getting text messages on my wrist,
my wrist.
Yeah.
So great.
And your brain is all developed,
but you're an adult.
Sketchy.
Okay.
But imagine if you're a 10 or 11 year old kid.
I've seen it.
Yeah.
You put something out there and you want to know.
Did you know did bill like it yet?
You know,
why did,
why did Mary like bills but not like so.
So that's rule number one.
You gotta get devices out of the bedroom.
Yeah.
Give them an old fashioned alarm clock.
Let him wake up with an alarm cuts.
One to no social media till high school.
There is no reason why kids in middle school or elementary school should have
Instagram,
Facebook,
snapchat,
any of those.
I agree.
They can text each other.
Like when we were kids,
he'd call each other on the phone is fine.
They can text each other.
But there should be no social media till high school cause it's a,
it's a social dilemma.
It that we can't solve alone.
We can only solve it if there's an agreement among parents and guidance from the
principal.
Please parents don't give your kid in Instagram.
Yeah.
My only concern is that they're not going to learn how to mitigate it or how to
navigate it.
Rather if we say nothing till high school and then when they get into high
school then they,
they're confronted with it.
I would like them to have some skills or at least some understanding of what's
going on now.
Wait
a sec.
So,
so I'm not saying don't let him have access to these machines.
I'm not saying don't let them know.
I know exactly what you're saying.
You're allowed to have social media.
And how about this?
Um,
the bullying that takes place in middle school is primitive and destructive.
Uh,
and the bullying that takes place in late high school is a lot less and is not
the same way.
Well,
mills like middle school kids are just coming into this.
Um,
there's some research on Jean [inaudible] has a book called ign and she has some
data in there that suggests that when you get social media in college,
it doesn't seem to harm you,
but when you got it and your preteen years it does.
And so,
and she thinks that it's in part,
the nature of the bullying is such,
um,
so you know,
sure,
we want them to know how to deal with this,
but you know,
they can learn it pretty quickly when they're 15.
It's not like they need a running start from 11 to 15.
So I just see no good whatsoever coming from social media in middle school and I
see a lot of harm.
If you want your,
I go around the country and talk about this.
The almost the rule now is when someone in someone says,
oh,
well my daughter's in high school and you know she's had it and I say,
how she doing?
Does she have anxiety problems?
The answer's almost always yes,
and if it's not her,
then her friends are all crippled by or suffering from anxiety.
So I think we have to,
you know,
you have to wake costs and benefits.
A few years ago we didn't know for sure about the costs.
Now we do.
Yeah.
No,
you're making total sense.
I'm purely playing devil's advocate and I'm on the same page with you.
I don't give,
my kids don't have phones and my 10 year old,
it's shocking how many girls in her class of phones and Facebook accounts and
Instagram accounts and they,
I'll say it right now,
her friends are at higher risk than she is of having an anxiety disorder of
being hospitalized because they're going to cut themselves and ultimately of
suicide.
Yeah.
It's so common and it's most of the kids in school now and when they get older
than 10,
the,
the number increases.
Like parents hold out for as long as they can,
but as they get older and the kids want phones,
man,
everybody wants a phones.
Right?
So let me put in a plug.
So I gave my son,
I'm saying two contradictory things.
One is I'm saying we've got to let her kids out,
got to start letting them at least by age eight at least to go with their
friends to play ground and stores.
We've got to start doing this.
Um,
and at the same time I'm saying that the technology has some negative effects.
Okay.
If you're going to send your kid out,
I totally get what you were saying about your panic.
Like the first time that we let her sign out in the park and,
and he didn't come home right when he said like,
and it was real panic.
Um,
and part,
so the two things,
one is we have to get used to that because he always does come home.
But secondly,
I didn't realize this when I gave him an iPhone.
My old iPhone,
um,
there's a great little product.
The,
uh,
I'm not,
I don't know if horizon,
no,
they don't make it.
It's,
I think LG makes it,
but it's a Gizmo or Gizmo gadget.
Uh,
and so it's a simple,
it's a watch.
It's a,
it's,
it's a big clunky thing,
but my daughter loves wearing it because it's kind of like a James Bond Dick
Tracy thing.
It's a watch.
You press a button,
you turn it on,
you can call three phone numbers.
That's it.
Three phone calls so she can call.
And so now I can send it out to get bagels on Sunday morning.
She walks about six blocks in New York City.
It's incredibly safe.
How old is she?
She is nine.
So,
yeah.
um,
uh,
and she is a much more independent,
confident girl because of it.
And she is proud of this fact that she is a free range kid.
She can walk around our neighborhood.
I mean,
we live in Greenwich Village.
It's incredibly safe.
Um,
so she can go get bagels and it,
you know,
she has no sense of direction.
So a couple of times when she's been out doing an errand,
she gets lost.
She just presses a button.
Daddy,
I don't know where I am.
And if she's calm and I talk it through and I can track her,
that's the,
the reassuring thing.
I can see on a screen roughly where she is.
So I can say,
you know,
what do you see?
And I said,
I'll come back this way.
And she always knows if she gets in trouble,
just walk home and start again.
What are you thinking,
Joe?
Why?
What's,
what's that facial expression for that thing?
It's just children wandering around on their own.
Yeah.
That has always happened.
And as they have to do at some point,
I know,
but listen,
look at how you're even reacting to this and what you're,
you're,
you're beaming up and you're adding emotion to your voice and you're smiling is
as though it's,
everything's going to be fine.
Everything you're doing this in a sort of,
you're not just reassuring.
You're selling it.
You're right.
I am selling it because we as a society bought into a set of beliefs that are
based on false hoods.
The risk to our kids is minuscule.
Someone calculated at present rates of abduction by strangers.
If you put your kid in a car and you go into a store and you leave the windows
open,
your kid sitting there in the parking lot,
you'd have to stay in that store for 700,000 years before your kid is likely to
be abducted.
Well it does not depend on what neighborhood you live in.
I suppose so,
but still the point is that there's hardly any actual abduction.
And so actually it's,
this brings up a really important point.
I'd like to say,
um,
you,
one of the sticking points here is that we're afraid to let our kids out because
bad things can happen to us as well as to the kids.
And so I would hope that would be the least of your concerns are what number one
concern would be your children's safety.
But then you getting in trouble for that hope would be the least of your
concerns,
not the least of them.
Because I am selling something,
I'm selling the idea that,
that the,
the gigantic rise in mental illness of teenagers is caused in part because
we've,
oh,
protected them.
We have denied them the experiences of independence.
They need to develop their basic social sense.
And so I am selling an idea that we've,
we've totally botched this and we need to undo it.
And a big piece of that is we need to be removed from the fear of legal
prosecution.
And so Utah,
the State of Utah passed a year and a half ago,
a year ago.
Yeah.
They passed the first free range kids bill,
which says it puts into state law.
It says,
uh,
I forget what the exact terms,
but the gist of it is a parent cannot be considered to be negligent just by
having the kids be unsupervised.
So if you send your kids out to the park,
you know,
you have to use judge.
Obviously if there's a pattern of neglect,
that's a totally different story.
But the mere fact that as you just said,
the story about what I'm teaching my kids to go outside,
I know that they're outside.
I told them to go outside.
You can't be arrested for that.
And until we have legal protections,
it's can be very hard for anyone to do it because they,
you know,
the risk is you could be drawn into months and months of supervision.
Your kids can actually be taken away from you if you give them independence in
some parts of the country.
It's interesting that Utah would be so progressive about that.
Um,
yeah.
I don't know the history behind it.
Such a safe place.
It's one of the reasons why.
Thank [inaudible] yeah.
So a big part of this that we don't trust each other anymore.
Um,
you know,
if,
if you don't trust your neighbors,
then you're,
you're not gonna let them out.
You're not let your kids out.